Add magma chamber benchmark (#7132)
geodynamics/aspect: benchmarks/magma_chamber/doc/chamber_elastic_expansion.md

```{tags}
category:benchmark
feature:2d
feature:cartesian
feature:nonlinear-solver
feature:compositional-fields
feature:community-benchmark
```

(sec:benchmarks:magma_chamber)=
# Pressurized magma chamber in a compressible material

> *This section was contributed by Annie Thompson.*

Reviewer: I think you should also add Cedric's name here

Reviewer 2: Concur :)

This is a 2D model of a pressurized magma chamber using a compressible equation of state and viscoelastic rheology. We create a pressurized chamber by including a non-zero thermal expansivity and adding heat to the chamber, causing the chamber to dilate.

This is based on a commonly used 3D benchmark in the volcanology community for a pressurized magma chamber in elastic half-space, shown in {numref}`fig:chamber`. Examples can be found [here](http://www.driversofvolcanodeformation.org/) and in {cite:t}`crozier:etal:2023` under exercise 1.3.

```{figure-md} fig:chamber
<img src="chamber.png" width="50%" />

View of chamber and output transect locations from {cite}`crozier:etal:2023`. In ASPECT, we implement this chamber setup in the center of a 50x25km box. Subsurface output lines are used for {numref}`fig:stress` and {numref}`fig:displacement`.
```

> This implementation simulates a half-space using a 50x25 km domain that is significantly larger than the 1 km spherical magma chamber. The model has free-slip boundary conditions on the left, right, and bottom boundaries, and a free surface on the top boundary. It is calibrated to have a constant 10 MPa pressure in the chamber by adjusting the heating rate and thermal expansivity of the material. To create elastic behavior, we set viscosity to 10<sup>20</sup> Pa s in the viscoelastic material model to make viscous behavior negligible. The material has a Poisson ratio of 0.25, following the analytical solution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This implementation simulates a half-space using a 50x25 km domain that is significantly larger than the 1 km spherical magma chamber. The model has free-slip boundary conditions on the left, right, and bottom boundaries, and a free surface on the top boundary. It is calibrated to have a constant 10 MPa pressure in the chamber by adjusting the heating rate and thermal expansivity of the material. Setting the time step (and end time) to 1 year and the viscoelastic shear modulus to 1e10 Pa (following the benchmark) produces a low effective viscosity such that deformation is almost entirely accommodated through viscoelastic deformation. While a compressible equation of state is used, this formulation does not currently influence the partitioning of bulk and shear deformation. Consequently, adjusting the compressibility (i.e., inverse bulk modulus) does change the stress field for a constant magma chamber pressure and the Poisson's ratio is thus equivalent to 0.5.
```

```{tags}
category:benchmark
feature:2d
feature:cartesian
feature:nonlinear-solver
feature:compositional-fields
feature:community-benchmark
```

(sec:cookbooks:magma_chamber)=
# Pressurized magma chamber in a compressible material

*This section was contributed by Annie Thompson.*

> This is a 2D model of a pressurized magma chamber in a compressible elastic material. We create a pressurized chamber by including a thermal expansivity and adding heat to the chamber, causing the chamber to dilate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a 2D model of a pressurized magma chamber using a compressible equation of state and viscoelastic rheology. We create a pressurized chamber by including a non-zero thermal expansivity and adding heat to the chamber, causing the chamber to dilate.
```

> This is based on a commonly used 3D benchmark in the volcanology community for a pressurized magma chamber in elastic half-space, shown in Figure {numref}`fig:chamber`. Examples can be found [here](http://www.driversofvolcanodeformation.org/) under exercise 1.3.

Reviewer 2: Can you add a reference to a publication that summarizes some of the benchmark work (for example, Crozier et al., 2023 below).

```{figure-md} fig:chamber
<img src="chamber.png" width="50%" />

View of chamber and output transect locations from Crozier et al. 2023. In ASPECT, we implement this chamber setup in the center of a 50x25km box. Subsurface output lines are used for Figures {numref}`fig:stress` and {numref}`fig:displacement`.
```

> This implementation simulates a half-space using a 50x25 km domain that is significantly larger than the 1 km spherical magma chamber. It also uses free slip boundaries combined with a free surface. It is calibrated to have a constant 10 MPa pressure in the chamber by adjusting the heating rate and thermal expansivity of the material. To create elastic behavior, we set viscosity to 10<sup>20</sup> Pa s in the viscoelastic material model to make viscous behavior negligible. The material has a Poisson ratio of 0.25, following the analytical solution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This implementation simulates a half-space using a 50x25 km domain that is significantly larger than the 1 km spherical magma chamber. The model has free-slip boundary conditions on the left, right, and bottom boundaries, and a free surface on the top boundary. It is calibrated to have a constant 10 MPa pressure in the chamber by adjusting the heating rate and thermal expansivity of the material. To create elastic behavior, we set viscosity to 10<sup>20</sup> Pa s in the viscoelastic material model to make viscous behavior negligible. The material has a Poisson ratio of 0.25, following the analytical solution.
```

Reviewer 2: > To create elastic behavior, we set viscosity to 10<sup>20</sup> Pa s in the viscoelastic material model to make viscous behavior negligible. The material has a Poisson ratio of 0.25, following the analytical solution.

Both sentences here may need to be updated to reflect the current PRM approach?

> As this is a 2D benchmark, it is not expected to match the 3D analytical solution from Zhong et al. 2019 (below). Instead, we compare our results against the output of a purely elastic finite element model (Cedric Thieulot, FieldStone, https://cedrict.github.io/). FieldStone has been tested in 3D and matches the original 3D analytical solution. Below are comparisons between this benchmark's implementation, FieldStone, and the analytical solution of Zhong et al. 2019 ({numref}`fig:6-panel`, {numref}`fig:stress`, {numref}`fig:displacement`).

Reviewer 2: Please add the Zhong reference to references.bib (see [this PR](https://github.com/geodynamics/aspect/pull/7130) for an example)

```{figure-md} fig:6-panel
<img src="6-panel.png" width="100%" />

Comparison of stress, displacement, and pressure fields around the chamber. Each inset is a combined plot of Fieldstone (left half of chamber) and ASPECT (right half of chamber) to help visualize the differences between model outputs.
```

```{figure-md} fig:stress
<img src="stress_plot.png" width="100%" />

Plots of stress along the transects shown in Figure {numref}`fig:chamber` for this ASPECT benchmark, the 2D Fieldstone implementation, and the 3D analytical solution. The interior transect is 2km above the chamber and the surface transect is 4km above.
```

```{figure-md} fig:displacement
<img src="displacement_plot.png" width="80%" />

Plots of displacement along the transects shown in Figure {numref}`fig:chamber` for this ASPECT benchmark, the 2D Fieldstone implementation, and the 3D analytical solution. The interior transect is 2km above the chamber and the surface transect is 4km above. Displacement from ASPECT was calculated by multiplying velocity at 1 elastic timestep by the elastic timestep.
```

> We have found that ASPECT produces a good match for stress, and a reasonable, but not exact match for displacement. This may be due to the compressible formulation, which is insensitive to changes in Poisson ratios ranging from 0.25 to 0.45. With future development and implementation of compressible elasticity, this benchmark can serve as a test for compressibility performance.

Reviewer 2: Reminder that this text should be updated once we have confirmed that the incompressible case (Poisson's ratio = 0.5) matches with the analytical solution.

Reviewer 2: One of the suggestions above adds to some text addressing this point, but it would still be good to reiterate that the model only matches the incompressible case here and comparisons with compressible formulations is a topic for future work.

This benchmark is useful for simulating the surface inflation created above magma chambers before volcanic eruptions. This phenomenon can affect surface processes and produces measurable field data that can be used to understand subsurface dynamics.

> References:

Reviewer 2: Following notes above, please move these to references.bib.
